Proteomic assay development for reproductive maturation state determination in Geoduck: towards a non-invasive proteomic assay for improving aquaculture[a][b]
Or
Reproductive development in Panopea generosa: towards a non-invasive proteomic assay for assessing maturation status.




Authors: Emma, Grace, Brent, Michael Riffle, Brook, Steven


Affiliation


Target Journal
Journal of Proteome Research
submit preprint to biorxiv




Abstract


Geoduck clams (Panopea generosa) are an increasingly important fishery and aquaculture product in the Pacific Northwest of the United States[c][d] while also holding essential ecological roles in the ecosystem. These long-lived clams are highly fecund, but sustainable hatchery production of genetically diverse larvae is hindered by the lack of sexual dimorphism, resulting in asynchronous spawning of broodstock, unequal sex ratios, and low numbers of breeders. Proteomic profiles were determined for three reproductive maturation stages in both male and female clams using data dependent acquisition (DDA), or whole proteome profiling, of gonad proteins. Gonad proteomes became increasingly divergent between males and females as maturation progressed. The DDA data was used to develop targets analyzed with selected reaction monitoring (SRM) in gonad tissue as well as hemolymph. The SRM assay yielded a suite of indicator peptides that can be used as an efficient assay to non-lethally determine geoduck sex and maturation stage pre-spawning. These results lay the foundation for the development of field based tools to assess reproductive status in marine mollusks.


Introduction


Sexual differentiation and maturation processes in marine mollusks are not well-characterized; many studies have presumed that steroids are involved in mollusk reproduction, but the majority of these studies targeted vertebrate steroids 1 that may not play a role in reproduction, given the apparent lack of functional receptors for androgens and estrogens in marine mollusks.2 Characterizations of gonadal differences in lipids (e.g. 3)[e], targeted proteins (e.g. 4), specific genes (e.g. 5; 6), and RNA/DNA ratios (e.g. 7), are only part of the picture. As suggested by Scott 1, an entirely different mechanism for maturation processing may be at play. For example, Li et al. 8 found a series of unidentified proteins that appear to be involved in maturation in the Eastern oyster, Crassostrea virginica. While Cubero-Leon et al.9 found no evidence of differential steroid metabolism in developing or mature gonads of the mussel, Mytilus edulis, they observed highly significant differences in phospholipid metabolites possibly related to vitellogenesis.
 
Aside from increasing our understanding of basic maturational processes in marine mollusks, elucidating sex determination and maturation processes has the potential for both commercial and environmental applications. [f]Wild Pacific geoduck clams (Panopea generosa, Gould 1850) comprise a large proportion of Puget Sound biomass and, like other suspension feeders, provide vital ecosystem services as both primary consumers of phytoplankton and biodepositors.10 A Washington State commercial geoduck fishery, initiated in 1970, provides significant economic benefits as the target of the most economically important clam fishery in North America.11  To meet increased demand, commercial farming of geoduck was initiated in 1995; farmed geoduck now generate over 20 million dollars in annual sales and are among the most valuable farmed shellfish on a per acre basis.12
 
The rapid development of geoduck aquaculture close to wild populations of conspecifics has raised concerns over farmed- wild interbreeding and the loss of genetic diversity. To address these concerns, geoduck hatcheries are currently encouraged to use large numbers of wild broodstock to maximize genetic diversity in farmed geoducks. An ongoing impediment to fulfilling this conservation goal is the nonlethal identification of sex and maturational stage in hatchery broodstock. Geoducks are not sexually dimorphic, so these determinations require hatchery personnel to increase the temperature of seawater and introduce large rations of microalgae to essentially coax the broodstock to spawn. Typically, only a minority mature and spawn during a given attempt by hatchery personnel, thwarting the sustainability goal to breed large numbers of broodstock to maintain genetic diversity. Highly skewed sex ratios in some populations and the inability to determine when to induce spawning based on maturation state presents additional economic challenges for shellfish hatcheries. A low-cost screen for gender and maturational stage would be advantageous to these efforts.
 
Since male and female geoduck gonads are morphologically and functionally distinct at reproductive maturity, molecular assays to track these early biochemical changes could help identify sex and indicate when gametes are mature. Significant changes in both gene and protein expression are expected as gonad tissue differentiates. Proteomic assays designed to detect these expression changes could lead to non-lethal, informative, and efficient tools for selecting broodstock.
 
Here we apply data dependent acquisition (DDA) via selected reaction monitoring (SRM) to characterize the geoduck gonad proteome, both to increase our fundamental understanding of sex determination in marine mollusks and to develop peptide assays that differentiate between sexes and among maturation stages in the Pacific geoduck.[g]
 


 
 
 Methods


Tissue Sampling 
Geoduck clams were collected in November 2014 from Nisqually Reach, Washington (latitude:47 08.89 , longitude:122 47.439  WGS84). Clams were collected at depths between 9 to 14 meters from a sandy substrate. Gonad tissue and hemolymph from geoduck clams at early, mid, and late stage gonad maturation, from both males and females were characterized for protein expression. Female reproductive maturation stages were categorized as early (no secondary oocytes, or oocytes that measure ~5-15µ), middle (secondary oocytes ~50-70µ), and late (secondary oocytes ~65-85µ). Male reproductive maturation stages were characterized as early (mostly somatic cells and ~5% spermatid composition per acinus), middle (about equal parts somatic cells and reproductive tissue and ~50% spermatid composition per acinus), and late (very little somatic cells and ~75-90% spermatid composition per acinus). Details of gonadal maturation classification and histological details have been previously described.13 Gonad tissue samples were taken from 3 early females (fG03, fG04, fG08), 3 mid females (fG34, fG35, fG38), 3 late females (fG51, fG69, fG70), 3 early males (mG02, mG07, mG09), 3 mid males (mG41, mG42, mG46), and 3 late males (mG65, mG67, mG68) with identification codes corresponding to those reported in.13 Hemolymph tissue samples were taken from 3 early females (fG18, fG29, fG30), 2 mid females (fG25, fG35), 3 late females (fG51, fG69, fG70), 3 early males (mG17, mG20, mG028), 3 mid males (mG42, mG46), and 3 late males (mG65, mG67, mG68)


Protein preparation
        Hemolymph protein content was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA; catalog #23225) and 50 µg of protein for each sample was evaporated to ~20 µl and resuspended in 100 µl of 6M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3, followed by sonication. Gonad tissue from each of the eighteen geoduck clams was sonicated in 6 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Gonad tissue homogenate (100 µg, determined using Pierce BCA assay) was used for protein digestion.  Protein digestion for hemolymph and gonad tissue samples followed the protocol outlined in Timmins-Schiffman et al.14 Briefly, each sample was incubated with TCEP buffered at pH 8.8 (1 hr, 37°C).  Samples were alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM; 1hr, 20°C) followed by a 1 hr incubation with dithiothreitol to absorb any remaining IAM.  To each sample, NH4HCO3 and HPLC grade methanol were added to dilute urea and to increase solubilization of membrane proteins.  Samples were digested overnight with trypsin at 37°C.  Digested samples were evaporated and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile  (ACN) + 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (100 µl) and pH was decreased to < 2.  Desalting of the samples was done using Macrospin columns (sample capacity 0.03-300 µg; The Nest Group, Southborough, MA, USA) following the manufacturer’s specifications.  Dried peptides were reconstituted in 100 µl of 5% ACN + 0.1% formic acid.


Global Proteome Analysis: Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) LC-MS/MS
Data-dependent acquisition (DDA), also referred to as shotgun proteomics, was performed to examine gonad proteomic profiles across samples (Figure 1). Liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was accomplished on a Q-Exactive-HF (Thermo) on technical triplicates for each sample. The analytical column was 20 cm long and packed with C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, 0.3 µm) with a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. Chromatography was accomplished with an increasing ratio of solvent A (ACN + 0.1% formic acid): solvent B (water + 0.1% formic acid).  The solvent gradient consisted of: 0-1 minutes 2% A; 1-60 minutes 5% A; 60-61 minutes 35% A; 61-71 minutes 80% A; 71-90 minutes 2% A.  Quality control standards (Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration mixture (PRTC) + bovine serum albumin peptides (BSA)) were analyzed throughout the experiment to ensure consistency of peptide detection and elution times.






 workflow.jpg 



Figure 1. Illustration of experimental setup and workflow for mass spectrometry data acquisition and analysis.  MS experimental workflow: 1. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed on the Q-Exactive-HF (QE) to assess the global proteomic differences in gonad (G) tissue between sexes and maturation stages. 2. Targeted assay development followed the steps of (a) data independent acquisition (DIA) on gonad tissue was also completed on the QE to create spectral libraries for selected reaction monitoring (SRM) method development; (b&c) spectral libraries were analyzed in PECAN using Skyline to select optimal transitions and design an instrument method for SRM analyses; (d) SRM was completed on the TSQ Vantage for geoduck peptide transitions in gonad and hemolymph (G & H); (e) Peptide transition detection and quantification was performed in Skyline. The chromatograms of peptide KEEELIDYMVKQ (from protein 130261_c0_seq1|m.17926) were collected using the 3 different MS approaches (DDA, DIA, and SRM) from the same late-stage female.  Black vertical lines indicate peak integration boundaries, and colored peaks represent the different transitions (i.e. peptide fragments) collected.


DDA protein identification and quantification
        Gonad peptides were identified and proteins inferred using a proteome derived from a de novo assembled transcriptome of a male and female geoduck clam gonad tissue libraries (NCBI Bioproject Accession #PRJNA316216) (Del Rio-Portilla et al unpublished). Briefly, reads were assembled using Trinity (ref) and deduced protein sequences determined using the Transdecoder algorithm within Trinity. The raw mass spectrometry data (PRIDE Accession #PXD003127) was searched against the protein database (fasta = Supplemental file 1) using Comet v 2015.01 rev.2 specifying trypsin as the cleaving enzyme, two missed cleavages allowed, peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm[h], cysteine modification of 57 Da (from the IAM) and methionine modification of 15.999 Da (from oxidation) (parameter file - supp file 2) to find peptide spectral matches.15,16  Protein inference and match probability were found using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline with a probability cut-off of 0.9.17,18 Protein identifications were considered true matches when the probability of the match was at least 0.9 and at least 2 independent spectra were associated with the protein across all samples.  
Non-metric multidimensional scaling analysis (NMDS) was used to determine  the similarity of technical replicates (supp file 3) using the vegan package 19 in dR v. 3.2.3 20.  NMDS was performed on log-transformed data using a Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix.  As technical replicates clustered closely together and showed less variability than biological replicates (supp file 4), spectral counts were averaged across each sample (n=18).  Normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) were calculated on the averaged spectral counts for all high confidence, detected proteins as a proxy for protein expression.21 Proteomics differences between sexes and maturation stages were explored with two methods: 1) NMDS and analysis of similarity (ANOSIM) were used to compare the entire proteomic profiles in multivariate space and 2) QSpec 22 was used to determine significant differences at the individual protein level. NMDS was performed on NSAF data followed by ANOSIM in the vegan package in R to determine the differences between different stages within sex, and between maturational stages across sex. Differentially abundant proteins among the six conditions were identified using QSpec.22 Spectral counts were summed across technical replicates to create input files for QSpec (http://www.nesvilab.org/qspec.php/) with data normalized by abundance.  Nine comparisons were analyzed for differentially abundant proteins: Early male (EM) vs. early female (EF); midstage male (MM) vs. midstage female (MF); late male (LM) vs. late female (LF); EM vs. MM; EM vs. LM; MM vs. LM; EF vs. MF; EF vs. LF; MF vs. LF.  Proteins were considered significantly different if the absolute value of the log fold change was > 0.5 and the absolute value of the z-statistic was > 2.


Enrichment Analysis
We used enrichment analysis to determine which biological processes (represented by detected proteins) were predominant based on sex and stage in gonad samples. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed for 1) each maturation stage (for each sex) on all detected proteins and 2)  uniquely detected proteins. The uniquely detected proteins were the basis for targeted proteomics assay development (see below). Enrichment analysis was also performed on sets of differentially abundant proteins from the QSpec analysis. Briefly, a p-value was calculated representing the likelihood that a GO term would be as represented as it was (or more) by chance among the set of tested proteins, given the annotation of the geoduck gonad proteome (3,627 proteins). A p-value cutoff of 0.01 was used to ascribe statistical significance to GO terms representing biological process.
        GO terms were first assigned directly to the geoduck gonod protein names resulting from the de novo-assembled transcriptome (see methods). This was done by assigning GO terms associated with Uniprot-KB BLAST hits (see methods) to the geoduck protein names that produced that hit. The geoduck protein names present in the FASTA file used to search the data by mass spectrometry were then used to look up GO assignments and perform GO analysis.[i]
        A p-value representing the statistical significance of the representation of a GO term in a set of proteins was calculated using the hypergeometric distribution using the following formula:

  

Where A = total number of proteins submitted that have a GO annotation, B = the total number of proteins in the background proteome annotated with the given GO term (or any of its descendants), I (intersection of A and B) = the total number of submitted proteins annotated with the given GO term (or any of its descendants), and T = the total number of annotated proteins in the proteome background.
        Then, the p-value describing the chance of having an intersection of size I or larger by chance may be computed as:
        P-value =   , where min ( A,B ) is the minimum of values A and B.
        The p-value is then corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Bonferroni method by multiplying the p-value by the number of GO terms tested (setting resulting values over 1 to 1). The number of GO terms tested equals the number of GO terms found (and all ancestors) for the submitted set of proteins.
              To generate the GO graph images, a p-value was calculated for every GO term represented in the protein set and for all ancestor terms up to the root term. The result is a complete directed acyclic graph (DAG) that represents a subset of the whole GO DAG where every term has an associated p-value. This DAG was then filtered by removing all childless terms that had an associated p-value ⋝ 0.01. The resulting DAG was then filtered using the same method, and this process repeated until no childless terms remained with a p-value ⋝ the cutoff. The final result is a filtered subset of the GO DAG that contains no leaf nodes with a p-value greater than the cutoff, but where a given term is guaranteed to have all of its ancestor terms, even if those terms have a p-value greater than the cutoff. Having the ancestor terms present is critical to visualization as they provide context for interpreting the results.
        A web application for performing this analysis for the geoduck gonad proteome is available for public use at http://yeastrc.org/compgo_geoduck/pages/goAnalysisForm.jsp and can be explored with our input files (supp file[j]). The source code of the web application and script used to assigned Uniprot GO annotations to geoduck gonad accession strings is available at https://github.com/yeastrc/compgo-geoduck-public. 


Targeted Assay Development: Selected Reaction Monitoring (SRM) 
        A subset of proteins were chosen for development of a suite of targeted assays using selected reaction monitoring (SRM) on the mass spectrometer (MS). Based on the data-dependent acquisition, proteins that were detected only in one of these stages; early stage males (EM), early stage females (EF), late stage males (LM), or late stage females (LF) were screened for usable peptide transitions in SRM in Skyline daily v. 3.5.1.9706 23 in gonad tissue. 
        Data independent acquisition (DIA) was used to generate spectral libraries for biomarker development in the gonad tissue (Figure 1). Equal amounts of isolated peptides from the three biological replicates for EM, EF, LM, and LF used in the DDA experiment (described above) were pooled in equal quantities for DIA on the Q-Exactive HF (Thermo). Each sample included a spiked-in internal quality control peptide standard (375 fmol PRTC + BSA; Pierce, hereafter referred to as “QC”). Sample injections for all DIA experiments included 1 ug protein plus the QC in a 2 µl injection. An analytical column (27cm) packed with 3 µm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch) and a 3 cm trap with 3 µm C12 beads (Dr. Maisch) were used for chromatography. Technical replicate DIA spectra were collected in 4 m/z isolation width windows spanning 125 m/z ranges each 24 (400-525, 525-650, 650-775, 775-900). For each method, a gradient of 5-80% ACN over 90 minutes was applied for peptide spectra acquisition. Raw data can be accessed via ProteomeXchange (http://www.proteomexchange.org/) under identifier PXD004921. MSConvert 25 was used to generate mzML files from the raw DIA files.
        In order to generate spectral libraries for targeted method development, Peptide Centric Analysis was completed with the software program PECAN (Ting et al., in review; Ting[k][l][m][n] et al., 201526).  Input files included the list of peptides generated for SRM (n=212), as described above, and the mzML files generated from the raw DIA files. PECAN correlates a list of peptide sequences with the acquired DIA spectra in order to locate the peptide-specific spectra within the acquired DIA dataset. A background proteome of the in silico digested geoduck gonad proteome was used. 
        The PECAN .blib output file was then imported into Skyline to select peptide transitions and create MS methods that would target specific peptides and transitions. Peptide transitions are the reproducible fragments of peptides that are generated during the MS2 scan in a MS. Peptides reliably fragment in the same way in the MS, therefore transitions are a robust and consistent signal of a peptide’s presence.27 Peptide transitions were selected if peak morphology was uniform and consistent across the MS2 scans for technical replicates. Peptides were selected for targeted analysis if they had > 3 good quality transitions and there were > 2 peptides per protein. A maximum of 4 transitions per peptide were selected for targeted analysis and no more than 3 peptides per protein were selected. The final list included 25 transitions for EM biomarkers, 22 for EF, 133 for LM, and 52 for LF.  This transition list was divided between two method files for the final SRM analyses to provide adequate dwell time on individual transitions in order to accurately detect and measure all peptides desired.28
        Selected reaction monitoring (SRM) was carried out on a Thermo Vantage for all eighteen geoduck gonad samples used in the original DDA analysis. Samples were prepared as described above for DIA (1 µg of protein per 3 µl injection).  A new C18 trap (2 cm) and C18 analytical column (27.5 cm) were used and each sample was analyzed in triplicate across two MS experiments to cover the entire peptide transition list (n=212). Raw data can be accessed in the PeptideAtlas (http://www.peptideatlas.org/PASS/PASS00943) under accession PASS00943.
        Hemolymph from early, mid, and late males and females was also assayed for sex- and stage-specific biomarkers. An augmented SRM assay was used on the hemolymph that included all the peptide transitions analyzed in the gonad with an additional 40 transitions from five new proteins. These proteins were selected based on gonad proteome annotation to include 1) proteins that would likely be circulating in the hemolymph and 2) gonad proteins that had homology with the mussel hemolymph proteome (CITE[o]). The proteins are vitellogenin (2 proteins), glycogen synthase (2 proteins), and glycogenin-1. PECAN was run as described above to use Skyline to select hemolymph protein transitions. For the new hemolymph proteins, the minimums for peptides and transitions could not be met for every protein but were still included in the analysis. These transitions, and the previous gonad transitions, were analyzed across sixteen geoduck hemolymph samples in two technical replicates, as described above for the gonad. Some of these peptides yielded no data in the hemolymph, resulting in a dataset of 171 peptide transitions that were reliably detected. Raw data can be accessed in PeptideAtlas (http://www.peptideatlas.org/PASS/PASS00942) under accession PASS00942.
        Acquired SRM data in gonad and hemolymph were analyzed in Skyline for peptide transition quantification. Skyline documents that were used to analyze the monitored peptide transitions can be found on Panorama for the gonad dataset and the hemolymph datasets (panoramaweb.org/labkey/geoduckrepro.url).  Peak presence was determined based on consistency of retention time (verified by spiked in QC peptides) and peak morphology.
        All peptide transition peak intensities were exported from Skyline for automated peak selection and peak integration analysis. QC internal standard transitions were monitored for consistency across runs by calculating coefficient of variation (CV) of transition peak area across injections. Peak intensities for the geoduck peptide transitions were normalized by dividing by the averaged intensities for the 6 QC peptide transitions that had the lowest CV in the gonad data (CV < 13) and the 6 with the lowest CV in the hemolymph data (CV < 10).
        NMDS and ANOSIM were performed on the QC-normalized SRM dataset as described above for the DDA dataset. An initial NMDS showed that technical replicates clustered together well and that variation was lower within biological replicates compared to between replicates (supp file [p]), therefore technical replicate peak intensities were averaged for the rest of the analysis. ANOSIM was performed using grouping by sex and reproductive stage alone, as well as by a combined sex-stage factor. Coefficients of variation were calculated for combined technical replicates using the raster package in R.
        Eigenvector loadings were calculated for the gonad and hemolymph data using the vegan package in R. For each dataset, the top 20 transitions with the combination of lowest p-value and highest loading value were selected as the most “significant” biomarkers. Heatmaps of the log-normalized transition intensities for these biomarker transitions were made using pheatmap in R 29, clustering rows (peptide transitions) and columns (samples) using euclidean distance and the average clustering method.










________________




Results


DDA Proteomics
The mass spectrometry data (PRIDE Accession #PXD003127) interpreted with a species- and tissue-specific transcriptome yielded 3,627 proteins inferred with high confidence (total spectral count across all replicates > 1) across all gonad tissue samples (supp file 6).  Female and male gonad proteomic profiles were more similar in early stage maturation, with proteomes diverging as reproductive maturity advanced (Figure 2).  Proteomic profiles were significantly different between sexes (R = 0.4122, p = 0.002) and maturation stages (R = 0.3025, p = 0.004).
 Unique proteomes are sets of proteins that were detected in a single sex-stage with the DDA analysis. The entire female unique proteomic profile across all stages contained 305 proteins and 522 were unique to males.  The number of proteins unique to a specific maturation stage increased with maturity from 24 and 20 in early females and males, respectively, to 161 and 145 in late stage females and males. These sex-stage unique proteomes were used to develop the SRM assays. These protein sets were enriched in the processes protein phosphorylation (early female), regulation of hydrolase activity (mid female), protein glycosylation and homophilic cell adhesion (late female), and microtubule-based movement (late male). No biological processes were enriched in the unique proteomes of early and mid males.
Sex-stage full proteomes encompass the entire suite of proteins detected in the geoducks analyzed within a specific sex and stage. Actin filament organization and translation (and related processes) were enriched in the early female full proteome. In the mid female full proteome, the enriched processes were hexose metabolic process, and translation. The late female full proteome was enriched for proteins involved in DNA replication, translation, and translational initiation. In early males, the full proteome was enriched for translation, oxidation-reduction process, and small molecule metabolic process. Mid males have a full proteome enriched in the processes of translation, ATP metabolic process, pyruvate metabolic process, and oxidation-reduction process. Detected proteins in late males were enriched in translation and cellular macromolecular complex assembly. Visualizations of the GO trees representing these results can be found in supplemental file 7.
 NMDS NSAF.jpg 

Figure 2. Non-metric multidimensional scaling plot (NMDS) of geoduck gonad whole proteomic profiles generated by data-dependent analysis. Gonad proteomes differ among clams by both sex (male = orange, female = blue) and stage (early = circles, mid = squares, late = triangles; p<0.05).


Numerous proteins were differentially abundant in comparisons between stage and sex based on analysis with QSpec.  The number of differentially abundant proteins within a stage and between sexes increased from 387 between early males and females to 1035 between late males and females (Figure, supp file 6). There were more differentially abundant proteins between the stages within males than females (supp file 6). Enrichment analysis revealed which processes were over-represented in the sets of differentially abundant proteins, when compared to the entire proteome (Figure). Among the proteins that were differentially abundant within a stage and between sexes (e.g. early males versus early females), translation was enriched in early, mid, and late with the only other enriched process being microtubule-based process in late male versus late female. Between all stages in the females, differentially abundant proteins were enriched in the processes of translation and DNA replication-related processes. The proteins that were differentially abundant between early and mid males were enriched in purine ribonucleoside (and ribonucleotide) triphosphate biosynthetic process, ribonucleotide biosynthetic process, and carbohydrate biosynthetic process. Enrichment analysis of mid versus late males yielded the processes monocarboxylic acid metabolic process and microtubule-based process. The latter was also enriched in early versus late males, along with oxidation-reduction process and purine ribonucleoside (and ribonucleotide) triphosphate biosynthetic process.
 venns.jpg 

Figure. Venn diagrams with corresponding enriched biological processes for A) sex-stage full proteomes of early female (blue), early male (yellow), late female (green), and late male (red) and B) differentially abundant proteins for QSpec comparisons between early males (EM) and mid males (MM); EM and late males (LM); early females (EF) and mid females (MF); EF and late females (LF). Venn diagrams produced in Venny.30




Targeted Assay Development: Selected Reaction Monitoring (SRM) 
        SRM was applied to create peptide assays that could resolve geoduck sexes and maturation stages for better broodstock management. DDA is suited to global discovery of proteomic patterns, but it suffers from lack of reproducibility and relative insensitivity to low abundance peptides. When a MS is in SRM mode, it reproducibly measures the entire signal of specific peptides of interest.  Peptide transitions in the gonad (n=212) and hemolymph (n=171) derived from proteins detected in a single sex-maturation stage from early male (EM), early female (EF), late male (LM), and late female (LF) proteomes were measured across all three maturation stages and both sexes (supp file 8). Many transitions had stable coefficients of variation across all biological replicates, although some still had high CVs, indicating a need for assay optimization (supp file 9). 
In an ordination plot, the gonad SRM data resolved males and females better in late-stage samples than the early- or mid-stage (Figure NMDSA). There was significant separation based on gonad SRM data for sex (R = 0.2373, p=0.003), stage (R=0.2189, p=0.007), and a combined sex-stage factor (R=0.4132, p=0.001). The hemolymph SRM data only resolved the late female group from the rest of the geoduck (Figure NMDSB). There was significant separation of the clam hemolymph proteomic profiles based on sex (R=0.1384, p=0.043) and sex-stage (R=0.4892, p=0.001), but not by stage alone (R=0.1435, p=0.065).
        The peptide transitions that drive the differences among the geoduck sex-stage groups in the NMDS plots (determined by eigenvector analysis) are likely the most informative for differentiating groups and have the best potential as biomarkers in a pared down assay. Along Axis 1 in the gonad NMDS plot (Figure NMDS) peptides that are “pushing” the separation of the male maturation stages are from the proteins flap endonuclease, IQ domain-containing protein K, WD repeat-containing protein on Y chromosome, tetratricopeptide repeat protein 18, spectrin alpha chain, and four uncharacterized proteins (Figure heat map). Along Axis 2 for the gonad data, the proteins that play the most significant role in the separation of the female stages are WD repeat-containing protein on Y chromosome, tetratripcopeptide repeat protein 18, spectrin alpha chain, centrosomal protein of 70 kDa, and four uncharacterized proteins. From the hemolymph SRM NMDS (Figure), the main peptide drivers along Axis 1 (separating late females from all other geoduck) are from the proteins flap endonuclease, vitellogenin, and one uncharacterized protein (Figure heat map). In a cluster analysis of just these significant transitions, sex and stage groups from the gonad data cluster well and there is separation of males and females in the hemolymph data (Figure heat map).  


 gonad SRM.jpg 

Figure. A) NMDS of geoduck gonad peptide transition abundance generated by selected reaction monitoring. Gonad proteomes differ among clams by both sex (male = orange, female = blue) and stage (early = circles, mid = squares, late = triangles; p<0.05). B) Heatmap of log-normalized peptide transition intensities for the top 20 most significant transitions (based on NMDS analysis (A)) across all samples (early/circles, mid/squares, and late/triangles males/orange and females/blue) gonad. Each row (peptide transition) is labeled by its corresponding protein annotation in gray. Superscripts indicate for which NMDS axis a transition is significant.


 hemolymph SRM.jpg 
[q]
Figure. A) NMDS of geoduck hemolymph peptide transition abundance generated by selected reaction monitoring. The main plot contains a point for each technical and biological replicate; the inset (lower righthand corner) shows the same data in a NMDS with the technical replicates averaged. Hemolymph proteomes differ among clams by sex (male = orange, female = blue; p<0.05). B) Heatmap of log-normalized peptide transition intensities for the top 20 most significant transitions (based on NMDS analysis (A)) across all samples (early/circles, mid/squares, and late/triangles males/orange and females/blue) hemolymph. Each row (peptide transition) is labeled by its corresponding protein annotation in gray. Superscripts indicate for which NMDS axis a transition is significant.


Discussion[r] - 
Intro paragraph - -limited use in ecological systems - omics
Biology sex stage unique
Informative biomarks gonad - early late male female
Hemolymph works   




        Proteomics has the capacity to uncover molecular physiological processes underlying functional phenotypic change, such as the maturation of reproductive tissue. We have characterized the geoduck clam gonad proteome throughout reproductive maturation for both males and females. Our data-dependent analysis (DDA) approach yielded 3,627 detected proteins across both sexes and three maturation stages. Based on the DDA data, 27 proteins from early and late stage male and female clams were selected for selected reaction monitoring (SRM), or targeted proteomics, to develop biomarker assays of geoduck reproductive stage based on 85 peptides. These proteins yielded 212 peptide transitions that were candidates for biomarker development in gonad and 171 in hemolymph. The gonad peptide transitions could be decreased to a set of 29 transitions that would accurately predict a) if a geoduck is male or female and b) how far it is from reproductive maturity. In the hemolymph, 20 peptide transitions can accurately differentiate late female geoduck from others. These molecular tools can directly address the geoduck production problem of asynchronous spawning due to different maturation stages and unknown sexes.


DDA
There are clear proteomic profile differences in the geoduck gonad by both sex and maturation stage and these differences reveal the biochemical pathways underlying tissue reproductive specialization. More proteins are differentially abundant between early and late stages of reproductive maturity, compared to early and mid-stages, for both males and females, reflecting that, as maturation progresses, gonadal tissue becomes highly specialized to male or female reproduction. Throughout geoduck reproductive maturation (which lasts approximately X days), the gonad goes from undifferentiated connective tissue to a highly specialized reproductive tissue that can release fully mature sperm and eggs. These dramatic phenotypic changes required for reproductive maturity are visible with histology (Crandall & Roberts 2016) and are realized via changes at the molecular level that prompt the biochemical shifts necessary to create mature gonad. For example, the zona pellucida protein (cds.comp134923_c0_seq3|m.23445) and vitellogenin (cds.comp144315_c0_seq1|m.50928) became significantly more abundant in the female gonad as geoduck matured. 
The sex- and stage-specific proteomes were enriched for specific biological processes, further demonstrating tissue specialization. In females, the early-stage gonad proteome was enriched in proteins involved in protein phosphorylation, the mid-stage was enriched in regulation of hydrolase activity and carbohydrate metabolism, and the late stage was enriched in protein glycosylation, signal peptide processing, DNA replication, and cell adhesion. These shifts in biological pathways clarify the mechanisms behind what has already been observed in bivalve tissue morphology during maturation. The enrichment in the process “protein phosphorylation” likely represents the activation of translated proteins required to effect gonad structural and functional changes. The enrichment of carbohydrate metabolism in mid females reflects the increased mobilization of carbohydrates to support the energy-intensive process of gonad maturation. Previous biochemical work has highlighted the importance of glycogen metabolism during bivalve reproductive maturation 31,7 and carbohydrate metabolism during vertebrate oocyte maturation 32,33, however, a more complex overview of gonad carbohydrate metabolism is revealed in the proteomics data. The proteins contributing to the enrichment of carbohydrate metabolism processes in mid females are involved in glycan metabolism (2 enzymes), glycolysis (3 enzymes), gluconeogenesis (2 enzymes), and the pentose phosphate pathway (2 enzymes). These enzymes are detected in the geoduck gonad, but are not differentially abundant. It is likely that, similar to other marine invertebrates, there is a rapid upregulation of glycolysis in geoduck eggs upon fertilization.34
As geoduck females enter the late stages of maturation, more proteins are detected that are related to cell replication (the “DNA replication” group) as well as cell adhesion, which is an essential biological process in maturing oocytes in vertebrates.35,36 The strong cell adhesion signal in late-stage females is driven in large part by the many cadherin and protocadherin proteins detected in a single female (female 51[s][t]). However, seven protocadherins were detected at significantly higher abundance in more than a single late-stage female - compared to early and mid stages - and laminin, talin, and vinculin were significantly less abundant in late females compared to other females. Evidence for the importance of DNA replication was more consistent: DNA helicase, DNA ligase, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, and ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase were all significantly more abundant in late females than early or mid stages. This surge in DNA replication-associated proteins is likely a reflection of an up-regulation of meiosis and/or mitosis.  These changes represent the diversity in function of female gonad tissue as it undergoes reproductive maturation.
The male tissue similarly undergoes increased complexity and specialization: the early male gonad proteome was enriched only in translation processes, the mid-stage male proteome was enriched in ATP metabolic process, and the late stage for nucleotide metabolic process, microtubule-based movement, and cellular macromolecular complex assembly. Translation, which was enriched in every stage in both sexes, signifies the physiological need in the gonad for a larger suite of proteins as it changes form and function. In mid-stage males, increases in proteins involved in ATP metabolic processes suggest a greater metabolic demand in the tissue as it matures. This is particularly reflected in the significantly increased abundance of ATP synthase proteins in mid males relative to early males and the significantly decreased abundance of V-type proton ATPase relative to early males (this trend continues, although not significantly, in late males). ATP synthase produces ATP from a proton gradient while V-type proton ATPase consumes ATP to fuel a proton gradient. These pieces of evidence suggest a physiological need for increased ATP production as male maturation proceeds. However, glycolysis pathway enzymes trend towards decreased abundance in mid versus early males, suggesting a decrease in ATP generated via this pathway, which is responsible for the proton gradient that drives ATP synthase. There may be a trend of ATP consumption over production during male geoduck gametogenesis. Adenosine phosphate molecule consumption was observed in mussel gonad tissue, where amounts of AMP, ADP, and ATP decreased as gametogenesis progressed.37  In late-stage males, the enriched processes reflect an increase in cell replication during the last steps of sperm formation. Several proteins implicated in mitosis and meiosis were detected at significantly increased abundance in late-stage males compared to early and mid: centrosomal proteins, dynein, intraflagellar transport protein, kinesin, and alpha and beta tubulin. All of these proteins are instrumental in the cell division and replication and their importance at this maturation stage suggests the presence of rapidly dividing cells. This could be a sign of both meiosis and mitosis. In mussels off the Atlantic coast of Spain, meiotic division begins approximately four months before the onset of spawning, while  mitosis reconstructs the gonad during and after spawning.38 These pieces of proteomic evidence point towards increased cellular energy metabolism and cell division during the development of mature, motile sperm. 
        Even with a highly specific protein identification database, the DDA method excludes many important, relatively low abundance proteins from analysis.39 The ten most abundant proteins (as measured by total spectral count) for each sex-maturation stage accounted to 14-26% of the total spectral counts across all proteins for a given sex-stage. Many of these proteins are “housekeeping” proteins, such as actin and myosin, and their dominance in the peptide mixture is likely masking many informative, low abundance peptides. Similarly, in zebrafish, highly abundant vitellogenin (also highly abundant in the mid and late females in this study) made it difficult to detect lower abundant proteins using DDA.40 Vitellogenin can be an informative biomarker, but by masking the detection of other proteins that may have a more nuanced expression profile, it and other highly abundant proteins can obscure the finer-scale changes that occur.


SRM


DDA analysis yields biologically relevant results, but for practical purposes of biomarker development we do not need the abundance profiles of >3000 proteins. Selected reaction monitoring allows for the selection and accurate detection of only the most informative proteins’ peptides to address a specific hypothesis. We leveraged the DDA dataset to create informative SRM assays of geoduck sex and maturation stage in both gonad and hemolymph. Both of these tissues have the potential for being the basis of non-lethal assays for broodstock assessment in aquaculture. Reproductive maturation is a complex process and involves suites of interacting proteins to achieve the end goal of mature gametes. By applying an unbiased method in the first step of our biomarker development (DDA) we were able to detect and include these informative peptides in our assay.
In the gonad tissue, we measured 212 peptide transitions that could differentiate males and females as well as early and late maturation stages. Since we selected these proteins based on data analysis, and not assumptions as to which pathways would be informative, they represent functional groups that do not appear to be directly related to reproduction. Our assay is based on proteins that are involved in calcium ion binding, phosphorylation, meiosis, DNA replication and repair, and membrane structure. Additionally, seven of these informative proteins are unannotated, so we cannot know their function based on homology. These unknown proteins may represent taxon-specific reproductive proteins and warrant further characterization. Reproductive proteins are some of the fastest-evolving, resulting in many species-specific proteins.41 A subset of the peptide transitions from these proteins (n=29) were deemed highly informative based on our analysis and would be good candidates for a more streamlined SRM assay. These transitions correspond to six annotated proteins and five unannotated proteins. The annotated proteins are implicated in cytoskeleton structure (spectrin alpha chain), DNA replication and repair (centrosomal protein of 70 kDa, flap endonuclease), and proteins that were identified by motifs and thus yield little functional information (WD repeat-containing protein on Y chromosome, IQ domain containing protein K, and tetracopeptide repeat protein 18).  The 29 transitions were almost uniformly at higher abundance in males than females, which is likely because we included more proteins derived from the late male proteome in our assay since these happened to have higher quality transitions in the MS.
        Hemolymph is another option for a non-lethal tissue sample and proved to have differentially abundant peptides based on sex and reproductive stage. We measured the peptide transitions developed for gonad with additional transitions that we suspected would be circulating in the hemolymph and related to reproductive maturation. Proteome profiles of bivalve hemocytes can reveal patterns of reproductive status, such as differing oocyte quality in Pacific oysters, as measured by larval production.42 However, biomarkers of tissue-specific changes can be difficult to detect in circulating fluid since hemolymph (or blood) is not the primary site of physiological change. The sensitivity of targeted proteomics has a lower limit of detection than DDA and is sensitive enough to detect some biomarkers of interest.43 But even if the same proteins were circulating in the hemolymph as were detected in the gonad, they may not be informative because 1) the proteins could be fragmented in ways that make them undetectable with our assay or 2) the protein abundance could be changing out of sync with reproductive changes. We were able to collect data on 171 peptide transitions that were derived from gonad tissue but detectable in the hemolymph. Peptide transitions from 16 proteins were reliably detected in both gonad and hemolymph, however, only two proteins had transitions that were highly informative in both tissues: flap endonuclease and an uncharacterized protein. The inclusion of vitellogenin in our assay confirmed its presence in geoduck hemolymph during later stages of reproductive maturity in females, but since it was such a strong physiological signal it dominated our statistical analysis. It was similarly the strongest signal in hemocytes of maturing Pacific oysters 42 and the basis of a SRM assay developed in sea turtles 44.  Since we were limited to the proteins from the gonad DDA dataset for our assay development, there are likely additional circulating proteins that would expand our hemolymph assay and make it informative beyond distinguishing late-stage females. 


Conclusions[u]
Through characterization of the geoduck gonad proteome and development of proteomic assays for reproductive maturity, we not only exponentially increased the molecular resources available for this species, but we also developed effective tools for non-lethal detection of sex and maturation stage in an important aquaculture species. Bivalves represent a rapidly increasing and sustainable agricultural product, thus increased efficiency and management of bivalve spawning has both economic and environmental benefits.  Our non-biased approach to biomarker development captured a strong physiological signal of reproductive maturation across proteins with a variety of physiological functions, thus expanding the range of phenotypes we could differentiate. 




FOR NOW, IGNORE TEXT BELOW
In addition to not achieving maximum productivity, hatcheries run the risk of having low genetic diversity in larval cohorts. This could pose problems both for raising robust seed within the hatchery and for generating geoduck for restoration purposes. Inbreeding can be minimized if sex ratios are determined pre-spawning to maximize male-female pairing.  Genetic diversity aids in a population’s resilience to different environmental conditions due to a greater variability in phenotypes (Hughes and Stachowicz, 2004). Furthermore, if cross-breeding between hatchery and wild stocks ever occurs, the diversity of the wild stock will be minimized (Waples, 1991).


A phylogenetic[v] analysis of three sperm-egg interaction proteins revealed that sequence similarity between related taxonomic groups is generally higher than between more distantly related groups. However, across the three proteins, the highest percent identity between two species is 50%, suggesting high levels of sequence divergence at the protein level. In a comparison of four yeast species, a gene involved in sporulation (i.e. gamete production) was identified as a fast-evolving gene and had only 32% nucleotide sequence identity and 13% amino acid identity across species.45 [CITE[w] protein sequence divergence between species?46] These particular proteins were selected because they are considered “fast evolving” since they are involved in the species-specific process of sperm and egg recognition [CITE Swanson paper]. These proteins are the foundation of maintaining the integrity of a species by avoiding hybridization. None of these proteins were detected in the DDA experiment (the sequence data were taken from the translated transcriptome), so they are either expressed at low levels or are not translated until gametes are released into the water column. [proteins not translated until gametes released?]


The phenotypic expression of these proteomic changes are reflected in gonad histology, which reveals egg and sperm development and tissue restructuring as maturation proceeds. This annual process of restructuring tissue to create mature gametes is incredibly energy intensive, which is reflected in the proteomics data. For geoduck, gonad production is almost constantly occurring, with just 1-2 months between spawning and re-initiation of gonadal development 47 and in some populations two spawning events occur 48,49. 


Immunogenetics
January 2005, Volume 56, Issue 10, pp 683–695
Protein synthesis during hormonally induced meiotic maturation and fertilization in starfish oocytes 
Possible roles of sex steroids in the control of reproduction in bivalve molluscs
The relationships between early ionic events, the pattern of protein synthesis, and oocyte activation in the surf clam, Spisula solidissima 


Acknowledgements
Sonia, Jarrett, Lindsay, GSIT, Jimmy, Priska, Yuval, Nick


MR is supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health (P41 GM103533) and the University of Washington Proteomics Resource (UWPR95794).


























Supporting Information[x]
Format:
File name. Brief description.
File name. Brief description. etc
1. Protein identification database[y] derived from gonad transcriptome sequencing. Git 
2. Paramete[z]r file used in Comet searches for the DDA data. Git
3. NMDS of  the whole proteomic profiles (DDA data) for the three biological replicates and corresponding three technical replicates for each sex and maturation stage. Blue points represent female proteomes and orange represent male. Shapes and shade (light to dark) represent the different stages: circles for early, squares for mid, and triangles for late. Git
4. Box plot of the coefficients of variation for protein spectral counts from DDA data A) across technical replicates for each geoduck biological replicate and B) across biological replicates for each sex-maturation stage. CVs were calculated in R using the raster package. X-axis labels correspond to the geoduck sex and maturation stage, indicated by e.g. “EF3” represents early female sample 3. The boxes represent the upper and lower quartiles of the data distribution; horizontal black line represents median value; “whiskers” extend to the greatest and least values, excluding outliers; open circles represent outliers (more or less than 3/2 times the upper or lower quartiles). Git
5. NMDS of gonad SRM data for the 3 biological replicates and corresponding three technical replicates for each sex and maturation stage. Blue points represent female proteomes and orange represent male. Shapes and shade (light to dark) represent the different stages: circles for early, squares for mid, and triangles for late. Git
6. All identified proteins from the DDA experiment with Uniprot annotations (e-value cut-off of 1E-10), total spectral counts for each technical replicate, calculated normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) for combined technical replicates, and indication of significantly differentially abundant proteins by pairwise comparison. Columns containing spectral count data have headers “SpC” followed by the biological replicate number, sex, maturation stage, and technical replicate (for example, “SpC 3FE” is technical replicate 1 from early female 3). Notation for NSAF is similar to SpC. The 9 columns in the sheet have headers such as “EFvLF” (comparison between early and late females) have asterisks in the cells that correspond to proteins that were differentially abundant for each given comparison. The last two columns (“NMDS Gonad” and “NMDS Hemolymph”) have asterisks in cells that correspond to the proteins with peptide transitions that contribute significantly to the SRM NMDS plot distributions. Git
7. Enrichment plots for early and mid-maturation stage geoduck (EM, EF, MM, MF). Processes colored in blue were enriched from the set of all proteins detected in the given sex-stage, while red processes are from the protein set that was uniquely detected in a sex-stage. Darker colors represent higher significance of enrichment. Git_EM Git_EF Git_MF Git_MM 
8. Raw Skyline output (in the tab “Skyline output) and peak intensities normalized by QC peptide abundance (“Normalized Intensities”) for the gonad and hemolymph SRM data. Git
9. Integrated peak area coefficient of variation values across all gonad peptide transitions (n=212) and hemolymph peptide transitions (n=171) A) across technical replicates for each geoduck biological replicate in gonad tissue, B) across biological replicates for each sex-maturation stage in gonad tissue, C) across technical replicates for each geoduck biological replicate in hemolymph, and D) across biological replicates for each sex-maturation stage in hemolymph. CVs were calculated in R using the raster package. X-axis labels correspond to the geoduck sex and maturation stage, indicated by e.g. “EF3” represents early female sample 3. The boxes represent the upper and lower quartiles of the data distribution;horizontal black line represents median value;“whiskers” extend to the greatest and least values, excluding outliers; open circles represent outliers (more or less than 3/2 times the upper or lower quartiles). Git






References


(1)         Scott, A. P. Do mollusks use vertebrate sex steroids as reproductive hormones? II. Critical review of the evidence that steroids have biological effects. Steroids 2013, 78 (2), 268–281.
(2)         Fernandes, D.; Denise, F.; Barbara, L.; Cinta, P. Biosynthesis and metabolism of steroids in molluscs. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 2011, 127 (3-5), 189–195.
(3)         Palacios, E.; Racotta, I. S.; Arjona, O.; Marty, Y.; Le Coz, J. R.; Moal, J.; Samain, J. F. Lipid composition of the pacific lion-paw scallop, Nodipecten subnodosus, in relation to gametogenesis. Aquaculture 2007, 266 (1-4), 266–273.
(4)         Arcos, F. G.; Ibarra, A. M.; del Carmen Rodríguez-Jaramillo, M.; García-Latorre, E. A.; Celia, V.-B. Quantification of vitellin/vitellogenin-like proteins in the oysterCrassostrea corteziensis(Hertlein 1951) as a tool to predict the degree of gonad maturity. Aquac. Res. 2009, 40 (6), 644–655.
(5)         Anantharaman, S.; Craft, J. A. Annual variation in the levels of transcripts of sex-specific genes in the mantle of the common mussel, Mytilus edulis. PLoS One 2012, 7 (11), e50861.
(6)         Ciocan, C. M.; Cubero-Leon, E.; Minier, C.; Rotchell, J. M. Identification of reproduction-specific genes associated with maturation and estrogen exposure in a marine bivalve Mytilus edulis. PLoS One 2011, 6 (7), e22326.
(7)         Li, Q.; Qi, L.; Makoto, O.; Katsuyoshi, M. Seasonal biochemical variations in Pacific oyster gonadal tissue during sexual maturation. Fish. Sci. 2000, 66 (3), 502–508.
(8)         Li, Y.; Yaqin, L.; Ghazala, S.; Wikfors, G. H. Non-lethal determination of sex and reproductive condition of Eastern oysters Crassostrea virginica Gmelin using protein profiles of hemolymph by Proteinchip® and SELDI-TOF-MS technology. Aquaculture 2010, 309 (1-4), 258–264.
(9)         Cubero-Leon, E.; Minier, C.; Rotchell, J. M.; Hill, E. M. Metabolomic analysis of sex specific metabolites in gonads of the mussel, Mytilus edulis. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. Part D Genomics Proteomics 2012, 7 (2), 212–219.
(10)         Newell, R. I. Ecosystem influences of natural and cultivated populations of suspension-feeding bivalve mollusks: A review. J. Shellfish Res. 2004, 23 (1), 51–62.
(11)         Hoffmann, A.; Bradbury, A.; Goodwin, C. L. Modeling geoduck, Panopea abrupta (Conrad, 1849) population dynamics. I. Growth. J. Shellfish Res. 2000, 19 (1), 57–62.
(12)         Northern Economics, I. The Economic Impact of Shellfish Aquaculture in Washington, Oregon and California. Prepared for Pacific Shellfish Institute; 2013.
(13)         Crandall, G.; Roberts, S. Reproductive Maturation in Geoduck clams (Panopea generosa) https://figshare.com/articles/Reproductive_Maturation_in_Geoduck_clams_Panopea_generosa_/3205975/1.
(14)         Timmins-Schiffman, E.; Nunn, B. L.; Goodlett, D. R.; Roberts, S. B. Shotgun proteomics as a viable approach for biological discovery in the Pacific oyster. Conserv Physiol 2013, 1 (1), cot009.
(15)         Eng, J. K.; Jahan, T. A.; Hoopmann, M. R. Comet: an open-source MS/MS sequence database search tool. Proteomics 2013, 13 (1), 22–24.
(16)         Eng, J. K.; Hoopmann, M. R.; Jahan, T. A.; Egertson, J. D.; Noble, W. S.; MacCoss, M. J. A deeper look into Comet--implementation and features. J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 2015, 26 (11), 1865–1874.
(17)         Pedrioli, P. G. A. Trans-Proteomic Pipeline: A Pipeline for Proteomic Analysis. In Methods in Molecular Biology; 2009; pp 213–238.
(18)         Deutsch, E. W.; Mendoza, L.; Shteynberg, D.; Slagel, J.; Sun, Z.; Moritz, R. L. Trans-Proteomic Pipeline, a standardized data processing pipeline for large-scale reproducible proteomics informatics. Proteomics Clin. Appl. 2015, 9 (7-8), 745–754.
(19)         Oksanen, J.; Guillaume Blanchet, F.; Friendly, M.; Kindt, R.; Legendre, P.; McGlinn, D.; Minchin, P. R.; O’Hara, R. B.; Simpson, G. L.; Solymos, P.; et al. vegan: Community Ecology Package; 2016.
(20)         R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing; R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2015.
(21)         Florens, L.; Carozza, M. J.; Swanson, S. K.; Fournier, M.; Coleman, M. K.; Workman, J. L.; Washburn, M. P. Analyzing chromatin remodeling complexes using shotgun proteomics and normalized spectral abundance factors. Methods 2006, 40 (4), 303–311.
(22)         Choi, H.; Fermin, D.; Nesvizhskii, A. I. Significance analysis of spectral count data in label-free shotgun proteomics. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2008, 7 (12), 2373–2385.
(23)         MacLean, B.; Tomazela, D. M.; Shulman, N.; Chambers, M.; Finney, G. L.; Frewen, B.; Kern, R.; Tabb, D. L.; Liebler, D. C.; MacCoss, M. J. Skyline: an open source document editor for creating and analyzing targeted proteomics experiments. Bioinformatics 2010, 26 (7), 966–968.
(24)         Panchaud, A.; Scherl, A.; Shaffer, S. A.; von Haller, P. D.; Kulasekara, H. D.; Miller, S. I.; Goodlett, D. R. Precursor acquisition independent from ion count: how to dive deeper into the proteomics ocean. Anal. Chem. 2009, 81 (15), 6481–6488.
(25)         Chambers, M. C.; Maclean, B.; Burke, R.; Amodei, D.; Ruderman, D. L.; Neumann, S.; Gatto, L.; Fischer, B.; Pratt, B.; Egertson, J.; et al. A cross-platform toolkit for mass spectrometry and proteomics. Nat. Biotechnol. 2012, 30 (10), 918–920.
(26)         Ting, Y. S.; Egertson, J. D.; Payne, S. H.; Kim, S.; MacLean, B.; Käll, L.; Aebersold, R.; Smith, R. D.; Noble, W. S.; MacCoss, M. J. Peptide-Centric Proteome Analysis: An Alternative Strategy for the Analysis of Tandem Mass Spectrometry Data. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2015, 14 (9), 2301–2307.
(27)         Wolf-Yadlin, A.; Hautaniemi, S.; Lauffenburger, D. A.; White, F. M. Multiple reaction monitoring for robust quantitative proteomic analysis of cellular signaling networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2007, 104 (14), 5860–5865.
(28)         Picotti, P.; Aebersold, R. Selected reaction monitoring-based proteomics: workflows, potential, pitfalls and future directions. Nat. Methods 2012, 9 (6), 555–566.
(29)         Kolde, R. pheatmap: Pretty Heatmaps; 2015.
(30)         Oliveros, J. C. Venny. An interactive tool for comparing lists with Venn’s diagrams; 2007-2015.
(31)         Beukema, J. J.; De Bruin, W. Seasonal changes in dry weight and chemical composition of the soft parts of the tellinid bivalve Macoma balthica in the Dutch Wadden Sea. Neth. J. Sea Res. 1977, 11 (1), 42–55.
(32)         Dworkin, M. B.; Eva, D.-R. Metabolic regulation during early frog development: Glycogenic flux in Xenopus oocytes, eggs, and embryos. Dev. Biol. 1989, 132 (2), 512–523.
(33)         Harris, S. E.; Adriaens, I.; Leese, H. J.; Gosden, R. G.; Picton, H. M. Carbohydrate metabolism by murine ovarian follicles and oocytes grown in vitro. Reproduction 2007, 134 (3), 415–424.
(34)         Yasumasu, I.; Tazawa, E.; Fujiwara, A. Glycolysis in the eggs of the echiuroid, Urechis unicinctus and the oyster, Crassostrea gigas. Exp. Cell Res. 1975, 93 (1), 166–174.
(35)         Fusi, F. M.; Vignali, M.; Busacca, M.; Bronson, R. A. Evidence for the presence of an integrin cell adhesion receptor on the oolemma of unfertilized human oocytes. Mol. Reprod. Dev. 1992, 31 (3), 215–222.
(36)         Campbell, S.; Swann, H. R.; Seif, M. W.; Kimber, S. J.; Aplin, J. D. Integrins and adhesion mlecules: Cell adhesion molecules on the oocyte and preimplantation human embryo. Hum. Reprod. 1995, 10 (6), 1571–1578.
(37)         Díaz Enrich, M. J.; Ibarguren, I. Implication of adenosine 3’,5'-cyclic monophosphate, guanosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate, adenosine 5'-mono-, di-, and triphosphate and fructose-2,6-bisphosphate in the regulation of the glycolytic pathway in relation to the gametogenic cycle in the mussel mytilus galloprovincialis Lmk. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 2003, 252 (1-2), 339–345.
(38)         Suárez, M. P.; Alvarez, C.; Molist, P.; Fs, A. J. Particular aspects of gonadal cycle and seasonal distribution of gametogenic stages of Mytilus galloprovincialis cultured in the estuary of Vigo. J. Shellfish Res. 2005, 24 (2), 531–540.
(39)         Pedersen, S. K.; Harry, J. L.; Sebastian, L.; Baker, J.; Traini, M. D.; McCarthy, J. T.; Manoharan, A.; Wilkins, M. R.; Gooley, A. A.; Righetti, P. G.; et al. Unseen proteome: mining below the tip of the iceberg to find low abundance and membrane proteins. J. Proteome Res. 2003, 2 (3), 303–311.
(40)         Groh, K. J.; Nesatyy, V. J.; Segner, H.; Eggen, R. I. L.; Suter, M. J.-F. Global proteomics analysis of testis and ovary in adult zebrafish (Danio rerio). Fish Physiol. Biochem. 2011, 37 (3), 619–647.
(41)         Swanson, W. J.; Vacquier, V. D. THE RAPID EVOLUTION OF REPRODUCTIVE PROTEINS. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2002, 3 (2), 137–144.
(42)         Corporeau, C.; Vanderplancke, G.; Boulais, M.; Suquet, M.; Quéré, C.; Boudry, P.; Huvet, A.; Madec, S. Proteomic identification of quality factors for oocytes in the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas. J. Proteomics 2012, 75 (18), 5554–5563.
(43)         Klee, E. W.; Bondar, O. P.; Goodmanson, M. K.; Dyer, R. B.; Erdogan, S.; Bergstralh, E. J.; Bergen H., R.; Sebo, T. J.; Klee, G. G. Candidate Serum Biomarkers for Prostate Adenocarcinoma Identified by mRNA Differences in Prostate Tissue and Verified with Protein Measurements in Tissue and Blood. Clin. Chem. 2012, 58 (3), 599–609.
(44)         Plumel, M. I.; Wasselin, T.; Plot, V.; Strub, J.-M.; Van Dorsselaer, A.; Carapito, C.; Georges, J.-Y.; Bertile, F. Mass spectrometry-based sequencing and SRM-based quantitation of two novel vitellogenin isoforms in the leatherback sea turtle (Dermochelys coriacea). J. Proteome Res. 2013, 12 (9), 4122–4135.
(45)         Kellis, M.; Patterson, N.; Endrizzi, M.; Birren, B.; Lander, E. S. Sequencing and comparison of yeast species to identify genes and regulatory elements. Nature 2003, 423 (6937), 241–254.
(46)         Clark, N. L.; Aagaard, J. E.; Swanson, W. J. Evolution of reproductive proteins from animals and plants. Reproduction 2005, 131 (1), 11–22.
(47)         Sloan NA, Robinson SMC. Age and gonad development in the geoduck clam Panope abrupta (Conrad) from southern British Columbia, Canada. J. Shellfish Res. 1984, 4 (2), 131–137.
(48)         Calderon-Aguilera, L. E.; Aragón-Noriega, E. A.; Enrique, M.-B.; Edgar, A.-R.; Jorge, C.-V. Reproductive cycle of the geoduck clam Panopea generosa at its southernmost distribution limit. Mar. Biol. Res. 2013, 10 (1), 61–72.
(49)         Marshall, R.; Robert, M.; Scott McKinley, R.; Pearce, C. M. Effect of temperature on gonad development of the Pacific geoduck clam (Panopea generosa Gould, 1850). Aquaculture 2012, 338-341, 264–273.


[a]proteomic given, given journal- bigger that aquaculture
[b]no idea what that comment means.  If you are submitting to JPR- the intro needs more geoduck hype.
[c]larger range?
[d]maybe, but I was referring just to the fishery/aquaculture. Not sure where else they do that.
[e]Do these all need "e.g.?  why not just have citation # at end of each statement?
[f]this is a key statement and I would argue needs to be earlier.  
In general, the 1st paragraph jumps into too much detail on what is done...
The way the intro is written now - you a re headed to aquaculture journal, not JPR or MCP.  
I am happy to help restructure this- let me know. Stopping for now.
[g]maybe needs to be fleshed out
[h]not 10 ppm?
[i]Is this clearer?
[j]the original supp file 5 was deleted from list in paper. still in github rep with an underscore before file name
[k]Peptide-Centric Proteome Analysis: An Alternative Strategy for the Analysis of Tandem Mass Spectrometry Data
[l]The Ting et al., in review is a different paper from the 2015 one, yes?
[m]and can "in review" also be called "preprint manuscript"? paper pile has a citation option for that
[n]yes, different papers. "preprint manuscript" means that it has been accepted, which I don't think it has yet in this case. I will check on its status.
[o]+roberts.sbr@gmail.com , what is the citation for this?
[p]this supplemental file was deleted from list in paper. still in github repo but labeled with an underscore before file name
[q]Now that I have separated the heat maps, should I make this one the same color scheme as the gonad one?
[r]An article to possibly discuss: Biochemical And Histochemical Changes Associated with Gonad Development of the Cortez Geoduck, Panopea globosa (Dall 1898), from the Gulf of California, Mexico
Fabiola G. Arcos-Ortega · Santiago J. Sánchez León-Hing · Carmen Rodriguez-Jaramillo · [...] · Zaul García-Esquivel, 2015
[s]+graceac9@uw.edu is there anything special about female 51 compared to other late females?
[t]nothing special! all later stage females had similar follicle tissue density and oocyte sizes.
[u]I know this is terrible....
[v]Should I do a similar analysis for 3 proteins that have a more neutral function to see if sequence similarity is higher?
[w]clark et al 2006 evolution of reproductive proteins from animals and plants.
[x]SI needs to be submitted as separate file labeled "Supporting Information for Publication" along with manuscript when the time comes.
[y]it also says protein data bank should be .pdb ... ?
[z]what kind of file is this? for supporting info, the journal wants specific formats which can be found here: http://pubs.acs.org/page/4authors/submission/software.html 


under "Supporting Information for Publication...." 


+emmats@u.washington.edu